# CS 440/540 Program #4: MinLisp to x86-64
## Due date 5/07/2022 (11:59pm)

Due date on blackboard
For this last programming assignment you are going to generate x86-64 code to implement the semantics of the input MinLisp code. I talked about x86-64 in class and there are examples online; however, in this handout I will summarize some of the most important information. For this assignment, we are going to make lots of simplifying assumptions - be sure to read this document carefully! I strongly suggest you deal with the different issues in the order I discuss them below. For each, test completely, including compiling and running on zeus to see if what you generate is correct (both syntatically and in terms of the underlying computation). Examples of each functionality are available online.

One assumption you can make for this assignment is that all input that you will be tested on will be correct with respect to our type system. It is ok if your program crashes on bad input (i.e. type incorrect input).

I strongly suggest you work on this assignment incrementally, testing each added part throughly before moving to the next. Your assignment will be graded on how far down the following list (which roughly matches this document order) you are able to generate correct, running code:

* Output - 5% (required)
* Arithmetic Expressions involving constants - 5%
* Relational and Boolean operators - 10%
* Input - 5%
* Procedure call control flow - 10%
* Procedure call data flow - parameters - 10%
* Use of variables define in scopes - 10%
* While/if statements - 20% (including nesting - if statements are particularly interesting)
* Seq/set/let statements - 15%
* Arrays - 10%

Note that this adds up to 100%. Students enrolled in CS440 only have to do 90 points to get full credit for this assignment (your grade will be calculated as total / 90).

The job of your compiler is to produce a .s file with a main program called 'minlisp'. I am providing a minlisp_main.c which contains some definitions and calls a function 'minlisp_main()'. I set it up this way to make your task easier since the code needed in a C main is a little different from that in a regular function. To build a runable program from minlisp input,

```shell
your_parser < minlisp_input > minlisp.s
gcc minlisp_main.c minlisp.s
```

The first line is used to create a .s file from the minlisp input. Then this .s file is compiled with the given main program to create an executable (a.out) file. Now we can run it!!

## Ouput 

Implementing the `write` function first will make it easier to test your code and will have you generating the setup/finish code that will be used by every program you generate. We are going to implement write functions using a C `printf`. The format of a C `printf` call for an integer is `printf("%d ",the_int);`. For the program `'(define main () (write 42))'`, the following output when compiled with the `minlisp_main.c` results in an executable that prints `42`.

```c#
        .text
.globl minlisp
        .type   minlisp, @function
minlisp:
        movl    $42, %r10d 
        movl    %r10d, %esi		    # parameter 2 in %rsi/esi
        movq    S1(%rip), %rdi      # parameter 1 in %rdi/edi - S1 is the string "%d "
        movl    $0, %eax
        call    printf  
        ret
        .size       minlisp, .-minlisp
        .section    .note.GNU-stack,"",@progbits
```

The parts of the code that implement the write function are in red. To generate the code above, the `expr --> INTEGER` production will generate the load of constant `42` into `%rd10d`. When processing the write function, this register is copied into the second parameter register `(%esi)` and a string pointer `S1` defined in minlisp_main.c is the first parameter `(%edi)`. This code is generated by the `expr --> ( WRITE expr)` production. NOTE: The output from my compiler, included in the code samples is actually much longer because it is doing register save/restore work that is needed in general. However, that save/restore code isn't really needed for this simple progam.

Input is a trickier and will be addressed after we talk about variables.

## Arithmetic Expressions involving constants

Next, work on generating `x86-64` code for expressions that use constant values. At the leaves of the tree, you need to put the contant values into registers (`movl` instructions). You need to have an attribute for some of the non-terminal symbols (like expr) that keeps track of what register is holding the relevant value. The leftmost column of the table below show x86-64 instructions that implement the Minlisp statement `(write (- (* 5 3) (* 8 2)))`.

| x86-64              | Registers in use  | Registers Available after statement                    |
|                     | after statement   |                                                        |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| movl $5, %r10d      | { %r10d }         | {%r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}        |
| movl $3, %r11d      | { %r10d, %r11d }  | {%ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}               |
| imull %r11d, %r10d  | { %r10d }         | {%r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}        |
| movl $8, %r11d      | { %r10d, %r11d }  | {%ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}               |
| movl $2, %ebx       | {%r10d,%r11d,%ebx}| {%ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}                     |
| imull %ebx, %r11d   | { %r10d, %r11d }  | {%ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}               |
| subl %r11d, %r10d   | { %r10d }         | {%r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d}        |
| movl %r10d, %esi    | {}                | {%r10d, %r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d} |
| movl S1(%rip), %edi | {}                | {%r10d, %r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d} |
| movl $0, %eax       | {}                | {%r10d, %r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d} |
| call printf         | {}                | {%r10d, %r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d} |

As discussed in class, the above code uses registers to hold results temporarily. Because the number of registers is bounded, you need to keep track of which ones you are actually using at any given point in time. You have 15 registers available but it is safest to only use a subset, saving the other registers like `%eax` and the parameter registers for special use. The subset of 32 bit registers I use is `{ %r10d, %r11d, %ebx, %ebp, %r12d, %r13d, %r14d, %r15d }` Assuming you "allocate" a register when you need one and "free" a register when you are done with it, this is plenty for any example that I will come up with. You need a data structure that tells you what registers are available (initially, all registers are available). Write two functions: one that gets an available register and another that returns a register that you are no longer using. The second and third columns of the above table show what registers are in use and free after each instruction. Note that we are using long instructions (movl, addl, ...) because integers and booleans will be stored as long values in the 32-bit portion of our registers. Getting this working for constants means that if you deal with variables by loading them into registers, all of work of computing expressions with identifiers is already done.

Don't worry about generating efficient code. That is much more difficult and doesn't fix anything a good optimizer wouldn't fix. Also, don't worry about generating code identical to the examples online or in this document. As long as the computation will produce the same result, your answer is fine. Most of the computations should be obvious. Booleans should be implemented as the integers 0 and 1.

Hint: To get this right, you need to look for rules where information in multiple registers is used to compute something where the result is in one register. For example: exp : exp + exp you need to be sure to free a register because your generated code will use the contents of two registers, leaving the result in one of them. The other register is no longer needed. Many different Minlisp statements use several registers; these also must to be freed when no longer in use.

## Input

Code for input is given in a number of different samples. For some reason (which I haven't had time to debug), calling the `scanf` function isn't working. Because I do want to be able to so things like initialize arrays, I've modified my input to use a random number generator so that I can get interesting input to my functions. To get this input, you will generate code to call `minlisp_input()`, which takes no parameters. The result of this function will be in **`%eax`**.

## Procedure Call/Return control flow

Implementing the control flow for procedure call return is relatively straightforward assuming you have no parameters. Remember in class, I talked about the four locations where you need to add code for functions. Below, I have given you what I am generating to handle basic control flow and save registers.

To test, I typically move my code from constant expression evaluation into a parameter-less function and then call it. Use 'call' and 'ret' to manage control flow. This is also a good time to add code to save and restore registers (using the stack) and build an activation record for the calls. For every function, I add the code below that deals with the callee-save 64-bit registers. Notice that I create a return label for the code on the right - I do this so that I don't end up putting that code at multiple return points. **I'm choosing a additional frame size (128 bytes) because I will need to have space for the 8 caller-save registers plus space (up to to 64 bytes) of local variables**. You will not be tested on programs where you can't fit into this frame size (assuming you implement as I describe here). You can make this number larger if you want, but smaller might be a bad idea. Control flow statements are marked in red and locations where data flow statements will go are in blue.

```c#
# At the start:					# At the return point:
								# move the result to %eax
pushq   %rbx					addq    $128, %rsp
pushq   %rbp					popq    %r15
pushq   %r12					popq    %r14
pushq   %r13					popq    %r13
pushq   %r14					popq    %r12
pushq   %r15					popq    %rbp
subq    $128, %rsp				popq    %rbx
                                ret

# At call points:
movq    %rdi, 64(%rsp)
movq    %rsi, 72(%rsp)
movq    %rdx, 80(%rsp)
movq    %rcx, 88(%rsp)
movq    %r8, 96(%rsp)
movq    %r9, 104(%rsp)
movq    %r10, 112(%rsp)
movq    %r11, 120(%rsp)
// load parameters 
call function
movq    64(%rsp), %rdi
movq    72(%rsp), %rsi
movq    80(%rsp), %rdx
movq    88(%rsp), %rcx
movq    96(%rsp), %r8
movq    104(%rsp), %r9
movq    112(%rsp), %r10
movq    120(%rsp), %r11
// move eax to another register
```

We are using quad word operations (i.e. movq, pushq, popq) because we want to save all 64 bits of the relevant registers just in case.

The result of a function is always put into `%rax/%eax`. I usually add code to make this happen when I'm working on basic fuction calling. You can see where it goes in the return point code above. Since the caller expects results in `%eax`, you just need to copy the correct register there.

## Procedure Call/Return Data flow

Parameters are passed into our functions using registers: `%rdi/edi, %rsi/esi, %rdx,edx, %rcx/%ecx, %r8/%r8d, %r9/%r9d`. Additional parameters would go onto the stack - however **you will only be tested on 5 or fewer parameters**. You can see this pattern in the scanf and printf calls above. The integer parameters are passed by value.

Since we aren't using the parameter registers `(%rdi/edi, %rsi/esi, %rdx,edx, ...)` to do any of the work described above AND because we are saving (and restoring) the registers for calls, you can use the parameter registers directly in your generated function code like I do, rather than saving the parameters onto the runtime stack and using them from there (which also works but is slower and takes up space that I want you to use for local vars). There is a program and example parameter and local variable usage in the next section the shows how to do this.

NOTE: This means that there is some code that really won't work easily, like the following:

```c#
(def g(a b)         
	   (f b a)
	)
```

In the code on the left, if you keep formal parameters a and b in `%rdi` and `%rsi` respectively, you will get the wrong value for the second parameter in the function call because that first parameter in the call will overwrite a. I WILL NOT TEST YOU ON CODE LIKE THIS. To achieve this, you would need something like:

```c#
(def g(a b)
	   (let ((x a)(y b)) f(y x) )
	)
```

which effectively saves a and b locally. I might test you on something like this.

All other local variables in a function should be saved on the runtime stack and well be accessed using `D(%rsp)` notation, where the D corresponds to that variable's offset into the frame. **Local integers can be defined in let statements are are size 4 bytes**. As mentioned previously, I always allocate 128 bytes for each stack frame. I use some of these bytes to save (caller-save) registers I will be using when needed. **You can assume that there will be no more than 10 local variables in a function, so the frame is probably too large but better safe than sorry**. In the given sample output, you will see references to local variables as `offset(%rsp)`. For example, if I have two local integer variables x and y, x might live at `0(%rsp)` and y might live at `4(%rsp)`.

You will need to use a symbol table just as with assignment 3; however, the important information is not the type, but information that will tell you whether every identifier is global, local or a parameter so that you can generate the correct code to for the given identifier.

For the example code below with parameters and local variables

```c#
(def f(x y)
    (let ( (a 2) (b (+ x y)))
         (write (*  (+ x a) b))
))
```

variables `x` and `y` would be found in `%edi` and `%esi` respectively, since they are parameters. Local variables `a` and `b` would live at `4(%rsp)` and` 8(%rsp)` in my code. For example, **if I wanted to assign the value of x to a, the assembly code `movl %edi, 4(%rsp)` would accomplish that**.

## Control Flow

You need to generate the appropriate labels and branching for the control flow statements (if/while) of Minlisp. To do this you will need to first add code to evaluate relational expressions. This involves using `cmp` statements to set a register to either 0 or 1. For example, `(< x y)` (assuming `x` and `y` are in `%edx` and `%ecx` respectively and assuming I want to put the result into `%edx`) would look like:

```c#
cmpl    %ecx, %edx      # note the order is "reversed"
setl	%a1			    # uses condition bits to figure out the result of < to put into %al
movzbl  %al, %edx		# copies %al to %edx zeroing out the top parts
```

Note that it is the set instruction that would change depending on the relational operator. Boolean expressions themselves are treated like the arithmetic operators.

The IF and WHILE statements will need to use labels to direct the control flow based on the result of the conditional. For example, consider (if exp1 exp2 exp3). If we assume that the result of exp1 is in `%ecx`, you would want to generate:

```c#
cmpl $0, %ecx		# value true or false?
	je	LABEL1
		# code to evaluate exp2 goes here
	jmp LABEL2
LABEL1:
	    # code to evaluate exp3 goes here
LABEL2:
```

*This means you will have to have actions inside the production for IF (and while) statements. An additional complexity of an IF statement is that the statement returns a value. For example, the statement `(set x (if (> y 0) 1 2))` means that x will get the value 1 if y > 0 and 2 otherwise. You will need to be sure that in the generated code, the result is always in the same register no matter which branch of the if statement was taken.*

*One way to deal with the fact that control flow statements can be nested is to use the YACC stack to keep track of the labels associated with each loop or if statement by associating them with one of the terminal symbols of the production. An alternative implementation is to use a stack onto which you push active labels. Once you finish with the particular statement, pop the associated labels. Remember that control flow statements use registers and they need to be freed once you are done with them.*

## Arrays

You will be implementing 1-D integer arrays. Arrays are created globally before any function definition and then can be used as global variables. under construction - updated soon

## Submitting

Submit on blackboard as a tar or zip file. Be sure to include a Makefile OR explicit directions on how to build your submission. Be sure to check that you are submitting what you intend! There is no time to fix mistakes in your submissions.